---
layout: paper
categories: papers
permalink: papers/apl-bmes-2020
id: apl-bmes-2020
title: "Unsupervised Ranking of Treatment-Related Infection Risk Factors in Pediatric Acute Leukemia"
authors:
  - Brandon White
  - Lawrence He
  - Elaina Horlander
  - Nidhi Mehra
  - David Kartchner
  - Vivek Vanga
  - Sateesh Gudapati
  - Tamara Miller
  - Cassie Mitchell
venue: "Biomedical Engineering Society Annual Meeting"
venue-shorthand: BMES
location: Online
year: 2020
url: /papers/apl-bmes-2020
type: poster

---

**Introduction:** Acute leukemia (AL) pediatric patients with Acute Myeloid or Lymphoblastic Leukemia
undergo intense anti-neoplastic treatments including chemotherapy, hematopoietic stem cell transplant
(HSCT), and immunotherapy. While survival rates have improved, treatment-related infection remains a
dominant morbidity and cause of death. Antibacterial prophylaxis is induced to counteract therapeutic
neutropenia, but must be prescribed sparingly. The goal of this unsupervised machine learning (ML)
literature mining was to identify which factors should be included into a future supervised ML algorithm
to optimally predict when AL patients should receive antibacterial prophylaxis.

**Materials and Methods:** SemNet is a novel literature based discovery (LBD) tool that utilizes a Neo4j
graphical network of heterogeneous semantic relationships harvested from 30 million+ peer-reviewed
PubMed articles. This biomedical concept graph consists of approximately 300,000 nodes connected by
nearly 20,000,000 edges; nodes represent Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) literature concepts,
while edges represent predications (affects, modulates, increases, etc.). SemNet queries return a list of
potential risk factors related to specified target nodes. These risk factors are then ranked by their relative
predictive strength using two scoring methods: hetesim and novelty. Hetesim scores employ unsupervised
ML to rank features agnostically, generating rankings normalized with respect to literature prevalence,
while novelty scores downweight literature prevalence to emphasize lesser-investigated predictive factors
that suggest higher importance. Twenty simulations ranked risk factors related to either “AML” or “ALL”
and “Infection” target nodes, one run for each node type of degree >50, yielding 20 lists of over 50 nodes
ranked by novelty and hetesim scores. The top 20% hetesim rankings were used to assemble a
comprehensive list of highly ranked risk factors predicting infectious complications. 

**Results and Discussion:** Notable results consisted of high Hetesim ranked risk factors (H) common to
both AL subtypes include pancytopenia (AML:H1, ALL:H4), neutropenia (AML:H4, ALL:H6), and
thrombocytopenia (AML:H6, ALL:H9) or comorbid disorders i.e. aplastic anemia (AML:H3, ALL:H2)
and hematological disease (AML:H5, ALL:H3). Thus, low red cells and platelets, and not just low white
cells, are contributing to higher infectious risk. Of note was the elevated ranking of Graft-vs-Host Disease
(AML:H2, ALL:H1) paired with bone marrow transplantation (BMT) (AML:H3, ALL H1), allogeneic
BMT (AML:H1, ALL:H2), HSCT (AML:H2, ALL:H5), autologous SCT (AML H7, ALL:H8) and other
stem cell therapies (SCT); this indicates SCT is most correlated with infection, followed by high-dose
chemotherapy (AML:H6, ALL:H3) and Whole-Body Irradiation (AML: H6, ALL:H8).

**Conclusion:** : Complete peripheral blood counts and categorical treatment type (especially transplant or
SCT) are most predictive of patients at high risk for treatment-related infection. Future SemNet
simulations will examine specific viral, bacterial, and fungal infection correlation. Study results assist in
variable selection for an algorithm to predict when pediatric patients should receive infection prophylaxis.